Good day I'm Norman Wildberger today we want to
go really far out in this remarkable successor
limit hierarchy that we have outlined in our last
few videos so basically what we're doing is we're
creating bigger and bigger arithmetic by thinking
about sequence of operations extending addition
and then multiplication and then exponentiation
and then this triangle operation that we've used
quite a lot the square operation and so on we
want to extend this list of operations in a
rather interesting way basically relying on
two ingredients the idea of the successor of
an operation and the idea of having a limit of
a given sequence of operations so if we have a
suitable sequence of operators or operations say
across 1 cross 2 cross 3 then we can concoct this
limiting sequence so with these two different ways
of extending further we want to now explore the
possibilities and one kind of underlying question
here is how do we actually get our heads around
what precisely a suitable sequence is there's a
bit of an open-ended aspect here that we want to
explore so we're going to try to pin things down
but I'm not going to pretend that I have a fully
blown completely laid out theory here in fact
one of the interesting aspects of this whole
story is that it may not be possible to lay out
from the beginning what we're gonna do it may be
more like you proceed in a certain direction and
then once you get to a certain level you have to
start making new decisions and the new decisions
that you have to make aren't at least initially
apparent from where you began with so it's kind
of a zigzagging element that really requires
you to think in a novel way continuously or you
know sequentially as you proceed all right so I
do hope that you've had a look at the previous
videos because you haven't this isn't going to
make a lot of sense so make sure you've watched
the last few videos and there we've created some
kind of hierarchy starting with these relatively
simple operations that we're familiar with and
then proceeding on ok so we started with the
operation of addition and then these first star
operations of multiplication exponentiation and
the triangle operation star 1 star 2 star 3 and
that generated our first limit operation which we
call star infinity and then we shortly changed the
name to star and then we take the successor
of star n to get star n plus 1 the successor
star n plus 2 the successor star n plus 3 and then
here we have a new triple of successors and we can
take the limit of the sequence that's starting
with these to create star 2 n then we can take
some more successors create star 3 n and then we
have the situation where we have a new kind of
pattern formed by this first limit operation star
n the second limit operation star 2 and the third
limit operation star 3 n and that forms then a new
sequence which has a new kind of limit which we'll
call star n squared which has then a successor
star n squared plus 1 another success or another
successor and then these three then generate a
new limiting sequence much as these ones did call
star n squared plus n ok so we can keep going in
a certain way but at this point we want to become
a little bit more efficient so we want to first of
all dispense with actually writing down the stars
all the time it's really only the subscripts that
matter so we can rewrite this thing without any
stars just the subscripts so 0 1 2 3 and then
N and a plus 1 n plus 2 n plus 3 then 2 n 2 n
plus 1 2 n plus 2 three three n and then jump to N
squared and then N squared plus one n square plus
2n squared plus three in that limit n squared plus
n okay this is described in the math foundations
181 on the fourth slide there you see a rather
big picture okay so now to be a little bit more
efficient and also descriptive about what's going
on to to understand more deeply what is involved
here we're going to make some more simplifications
we're going to start to replace these successors
with just dots after all it's very predictable
once you have star N squared then the next one
is going to be the successor which will just
obtained by adding the 1 to the label so from
N squared we know the successors n square plus
1 and the successor of that is n square plus 2
and the successor of that is n squared plus 3
so we can have a short form by replacing the
successors just with dots so we can start with
0 which represents addition and then this little
dot here could represent the successor of 0 which
is multiplication the next dot the successor of
multiplication which is exponentiation the next
dot which is the triangle operation all right and
then this these three dots generate the sequence
whose first limit is n so what we're going to do
is kind of disregard or sort of suppress the
the successors themselves because they're sort
of simple and sort of the we're gonna sort of
focus on the first limits that we that we see
so there's a limit n and then there's a limit to
N and then 3n and then N squared and then so on
and something else that we're gonna do is we're
going to record the level of the limits so this
kind of limit here of N squared was different
from the other kinds of limits because it was a
limit of limits it's a kind of level to limit and
so we might record that by putting a 2 underneath
the arrow okay so implicitly these ordinary arrows
should have ones underneath them corresponding the
fact that these are at level one limits and this
thing he is a level 2 limit so it gets a red to
underneath it okay so with these conventions we
can now have another look at this successor limit
hierarchy at least up to how far we've gotten so
far and and see it perhaps in the slightly new
light all right so have a look at this this is our
successor limit hierarchy at least up to a certain
point and where we've been very efficient in just
having successors represented by single dots okay
so let's have a look at sort of how things go so
we start with zero and then our first limit is n
then our next limit is two n next lindos three n
these are all level one limits and in these three
level one limits generate a new sequence which
gives us a level two limit N squared then we
have some more level one limits and they generate
then another level two limit then another level
one limit few of them these three then generate
another level two limit and now we're in the
situation of having three level two limits they
themselves form now a new identifiable sequence
and we can take their limit so the limit of N
squared 2n squared + 3 n squared is n times N
squared or n cubed and that's a level three
limit because it's the limit of three level
twos and now we have something that goes up
again because we now have a sequence with a
one level limit two level limit and there's
our first three level limit that generates a
new kind of sequence which has a level n limit
namely n to the end okay and now we kind of go
back to the way things were very exciting get
a level and limit and we're gonna go back down
to ordinary successors or the level 1 limit and
another level 1 limit n to the N + 2 N and then
our next two level limit and the N + N squared
much the same as here in fact what's gonna happen
here now is going to be sort of a repeat of what
has happened previously after this level 2 1 then
we get a level 1 another level 1 another level 1
and then another level 2 and eventually another
level 2 and then these 3 level 2's generate a
level 3 which is and the n + n cube that's a
lot like this one and then well then we have the
same kind of situation as we had previously we had
our original level 1 and level 2 and level 3 and
that gives us a level n which is going to be 2 n
to the N so from here to here is very much like
from here to here and then in fact the same kind
of thing will repeat itself that same stretch
will be repeated from this end to the next and
which is down here that'll be 3 and to the end so
from here we'll have a level 1 couple of them and
then a level 2 couple level ones and love to a
couple of level ones of the level two and once
we have three level twos 1 1 1 then we get a level
3 and then once we have a level one at a level 2
and level 3 we get a level n by generating that
sequence and that'll give us 3 n to the N and
now we're at the situation where we now have 3
level ends ok there was that first level in that
second level and the third level n so now that's
a suitable sequence which we can take a limit of
giving us something that we haven't gotten before
a level n plus 1 limit namely n to the n plus 1
okay so some things to notice first of all
let's say we have a level three limit that's
really telling us that what we're generating
here is something with an N cubed so the level
here sort of corresponds to the exponent
of the N that we're adding to what we had
before so here's an n plus one in red
that's the level and not surprisingly
what we get is n to the n plus one so the
level is reflected in the exponent here
another thing that we start to see is that the
red indices themselves are doing something which
is not so much different from what the black
sequence itself was doing except much more
slowly so you can think of the successors
if you like is being almost like level zero
limits we haven't said that but you can think
about it that way so we have level zero limits
and then we have level one limits and then we
have level two limits and then eventually we
get from that a level n limit that's occurring
right here that's our first level and limit in
some sense that's a reflection in the red arena
of exactly this first initial sequence in the
black arena here's one two three with limit n
that's somehow being reflected in having ones
and then twos and threes and having limit N and
then what's happening say is again that kind of
repeat of what we've had before so there's
a kind of a self similarity that starts to
appear here that the sequence of red numbers
which Recor is the level of the limit starts
to look a lot like the original sequence so at
this stage here we've gotten up to n plus one
so that's just after there right we've made the
transition we've gone in terms of the red labels
we've gone all the way up here and now we're at
that stage there so we're going to expect that
as we keep going the red labels themselves are
going to start navigating through the same table
there's a kind of self-similarity here like a
fractal aspect or something like that all right
so this entire game that we're playing here is not
meant to be viewed as rock solid mathematics I'm
not claiming that what I'm doing is completely
cut and dried in terms of the rules okay but
let's have a look at sort of what the rules are
and this is kind of experimental mathematics I
think maybe in the future this will be a bona fide
some branch of mathematics in fact I really think
it's it's a very rich direction but very abstract
and it has a lot to offer but nevertheless we're
in the process of sort of you know trying to
investigate it here and there's nothing really
anything to set in stone at this stage so so far
the rules are something like this that after three
successors we can create a limit that's sort
of our initial thing we can create successors
at any stage and if we have three successors in
a row then we can create their limit and that's
a level one limit and after three level one
limits we can create a level two limit so we
create a sequence from those three level one
limits and what they imply I mean they really
are just the starting points of a sequence and is
that sequence that they're the starting point of
that we use to generate the level two limit
okay and more generally after three level T
limits we can create a level T prime limit where
T prime is the successor of T so this happens not
just at one to two and two to three but but more
advanced levels as well in other words if we have
three level n limits then they generate level
n plus one which is the successor of n limit
and another thing that we've sort of observed is
that let's say that we have labels and I'm just
using T's here to be rather open-ended about what
these labels actually are so if T 1 T 2 and T 3
going to TN is a valid limit then from the most
recent T 1 T 2 T 3 level limits we can create a
level T and limit okay what do I mean by most
recent well so what happens is that the limits
go up and down okay no and eventually you get
a big limit and after you get a big limit then
it's almost like erasing the the table you have to
start again from the bottom and you have to build
up until you get something which is comparable to
that previous peak and then if you get enough of
those Peaks and you can create something higher so
that's the general kind of thing is that after you
have something big then you have to start with the
small surly races the the previous ones from from
visibility okay so that's what I mean by the
most recent t1 t2 t3 levels so it means that
the the labeling or limiting relation that are
satisfied by the red ones reflect the limiting
relations satisfied by the original black ones so
for example n plus 1 n plus 2 n plus 3 has limit
2n okay that's sort of the black level and that
means that the first n plus 1 limit followed by
the first n plus 2 limit followed by the first
n plus 3 limit will generate a suitable sequence
which has a level and a level 2 n limit now that
remark as I did before that a successor can be
viewed as a level 0 limit sort of so that it all
sort of hangs together roughly alright so I want
to zoom out now ok I want to see a little bit less
detail and bit more of the big picture so we're
gonna do that by disregarding detail and let's do
that by introducing these two green dots to mean
that there is sort of lower-level stuff in there
that we are disregarding okay so this is kind of a
bird's-eye view now where we're not just ignoring
the ordinary successors but ignoring a lot of the
lower level limits especially as we get into the
bigger ranges okay well we'll start with the sort
of beginning so we start with 0 and then 1 2 &
3 and these things have level 1 limit namely n
guess our first limit and then eventually we get
after a couple successors we get 2n and then 3
n and then there's a level 2 limit which is N
squared okay and then there's some stuff which
is basically like a repeat of what we already
have okay that's actually an other interesting
aspect of this thing that once you have a sequence
then it tends to repeat itself you can replicate
it so if you have a kind of a copy button you
just copy that sequence and that sort of slots
into here so I'm going from N squared there's
some stuff to another level to limit which is
2n squared and then in fact a similar kind of
range of stuff which then generates the next
level to limit which is 3n squared and then it
was these three level two limits that generated
our level three limit and cubed okay and then we
had a level one limit here a level two limit here
a level three limit here those are labels which
themselves have a limit because we can see 1 2 3
has limit end and so the first one and the first
two in the first three are legitimate entities
to create a new sequence which is going to have
limit of level type N and there it is there it's
n to the N so level n limit alright and now we
could essentially take everything that we have
up till now and copy and paste it and so stick
it in here and eventually we will create another
level and limit giving us 2 m to the end the same
copy and paste right in there giving us another
string with ending in this level and limit and
3 and the end and now we have three successive
level ends ok three six nestled level ends gives
us the successor of that one which is n plus one
here's our first n plus one we just add to the
n plus one okay now we copy everything that we
have here at least copy the steps all right and
basically paste it in there and we get the whole
sequence much like this and we get our next n
plus one limit which is two n to the n plus one
and then copy it again right there we get the next
n plus one which is three and to the n plus one
now we have three successive n plus ones that
generates an n plus two limit okay more stuff
to the next n plus two more step to the next n
plus two which generates the next n plus three
limit there's N to the N plus three and now the
first n plus 1 first an opposed to the first n
plus three that corresponds to these three dots
here that sequence has limit to n so this one
this one and this one generate a new sequence
which is gonna have level limit to N and it is
n to the to n the exponent here is pretty well
always the the level of the limit okay and now
we're going to skip some more stuff I mean you
kind of imagine how things go in fact you could
actually you know fill in a lot of the details
to try to give some more structure to what we're
so from this 2n eventually we get to a three end
level limit which is n to the 3 end and now once
we have an n the last in was this one here we
have n level limit and then the 2n level limit
and then a 3 and level of it let's look at that
so if n to the N and then and to the 2n and then
n to the 3n and they generate for us a level
N squared limit which is n to the N squared ok
that's pretty cool and then there's lots of other
stuff and eventually so I mean we've got as an N
squared so in terms of the labels we are over
here the labels in red are only at this stage
here so we're quite a far ahead of the labels so
eventually we keep on going and eventually the
labels would get up to N cubed which is right here
ok so once we get levels and cubed in terms of the
labels then we know that the N the N squared n
cubed generate an N label so correspondingly the
corresponding things here are going to generate an
N to the N limit which is n to the end to the end
okay now let us stare at this for a second and
let us note that now we've just created this n to
the N level limit and to the end is where on our
picture there it is there okay we have an N and we
have n to the N and now we have an end to the end
to the end right so think about the sequence here
with this N and this n to the N and this n to the
N mod so this is a level 1 limit this is a level
n limit this is level n to the N limit that is
also a reasonable sequence it's also a reasonable
sequence which has what kind of limit well we
could write it like this n to the N all the way
up to the end where there are n of them here it's
a different kind of limit it's also obtained by a
very valid sequence of limits that we've already
obtained level one level and level n to the end
we have to kind of go a little bit beyond what we
were doing up till now and have to think a little
bit bigger say okay we can think bigger we can go
up a level of course we've been going up already
with me going up at this incline but we know we
want to go up at even a steeper incline than we
were before so we can always do this I claim at
least you know until we start running out of room
in the universe or something but we can do this
we could always look for a more steeper path than
the one that we're currently on especially in
this game so now we are creating this new kind
of object which of course we recognize right this
is actually n triangle and we've got an n triangle
n in this picture for Li like n star 3 n and what
kind of a limit is this what do we put here in red
well that's a good question I think it's almost
a limit of the same kind really might be that
we should put something like that there as well
maybe one could argue about this what kind of a
limit that is but in any case it's the situation
now that this limit that we're doing here is I
think pretty comparable to the object itself so
we get a situation where the limit and the label
have pretty well caught up okay up till now you
know previously the the labels were lagging far
behind the actual objects but at some point they
have this potential for catching up and for those
of you who have studied ordinal arithmetic you
approach oh this is all very familiar to us no
doubt you can tell us more clearly what's going
on but you see that there's a distinction here
right we're still basically talking at least
in principle of finite integer arithmetic here
natural number arithmetic there's no infinite sets
at all here so this is a kind of mirror to what
the set theorists are doing but in a more finite
domain even though the actual domain is you know
actually incredibly big in principle you couldn't
really write down these operations effectively you
know in the known universe even with very simple
numbers if you wanted to calculate you know five
then star this operation was six well it would
easily blow out out of the universe I think in
any kind of reasonable way but so we've come quite
a ways here in creating these bigger and bigger
operations for natural numbers now underneath this
direction there's actually some very interesting
computing or programming challenges and I want
to alert the programmers amongst you of this
very interesting possibility of thinking about
things so the challenge is to write programs
that actually implement these various operations
that we found in our hierarchy so for example we
started out our first limit was star 1 star 2
star 3 etc that sequence generated this limit
star n and so to get at star and we really had
to use this basic defining property right the
defining property was that M star and K if M and
K are natural numbers that we want to multiply
using this operation then the definition is that
it's M star K K and so to implement this you have
to have a program that allows you to compute all
of the stars you really need to have all of the
stars at your disposal and we could say that in
the following way that we really need a program
that computes for natural numbers M K and let's
say P the product M star PK we want to be able to
do that kind of general computation and if we can
do that general computation well then calculating
M star NK will be easy now this particular
combination of things is actually something
with a very long and distinguished pedigree it's
essentially what's called Ackerman's function ok
it's not exactly Ackerman's function Ackerman's
function differs from this by just a bit of a
shift by one in a couple of these variables
okay but it's essentially the idea of Ackerman's
function and that goes back quite a long ways
to 1928 long before we had computers and such
alright so this is a very concrete example of a
challenge to actually write down a program that
will input three natural numbers M K and P and
calculate this thing here and that's not that
hard people have done that but that's probably
a good starting point so if we consider going
up a few rungs say to the limit star n star 2 and
star 3 and going towards star N squared alright so
in order to get this star N squared operation
we then really want to have all of the star K
ends we have to have this entire sequence at our
disposal the cause the definition I remind you of
em star n squared K M and K are natural numbers
the definition is that it's M star K and K you
take the K element in this sequence and use that
as the operation okay so to implement this kind of
thing you'd want to have a program that computes
something like this that defeats for three natural
numbers say M K and L the product M star Ln K so
when L is 3 it would calculate m star 3 n K so we
want though to have control over not just any
one of these but all of them together alright
so we will encode that by a bigger program that
inputs three things rather than just two things
now if you are able to write such a program
and it's like I think a pretty good challenge
then of course running it actually except on the
most trivial of numbers will be something that's
problematic well you can press the Run button
but what will happen is that this thing will
just start churning away and start filling up your
hard drive and eventually you know everything will
just overwhelm your system so you're not going
to be able to run this and finish the program
generally but nevertheless you can still create
such a program and this program then is a tangible
manifestation of this operation even if we can't
actually implement it by running it to conclusion
so I think there's a interesting challenge here
too to those who like to program just quite a lot
of people these days so who can create a program
for say star N squared and then going up some
levels to star in to the end for example this is
already perhaps hugely challenging and maybe even
ultimately for something like star and triangle
and I imagine these are very challenging you
probably want to start much more modestly here and
you know but it's something that people can actual
we write down programs and we can check whether
these programs actually work theoretically I
think it's cool okay so what happens after this
star and triangle end that we've now arrived at
of course we can keep going we can always take
successors and then having a few successors we
can take limits and so on so we can keep on going
but I don't really have a very clear idea of how
the story unfolds and I have some intuition and
it's I think rather challenging to to proceed up
this ever-increasingly sloping path so it's
a very steep road and there's all kinds of
Forks and you have to make decisions and there's
probably pitfalls and wrong turns possible so you
know one gets very high with course very heavy
scenery and dizzying heights so just to give you
an orientation we could start of course with star
and triangle end and we could do kind of obvious
things we could take successors okay we could
take you know add one maybe we'll just replace
this with the just the index itself so we'll
just start with n triangle n so after that we
could of course add one and then we could add two
we could add three and so on eventually we would
add n okay and then eventually without being
very consistent here we'd get something like
an triangle and plus now this the second thing
here can really go through the entire sequence
that we've already generated all right we can
go to n square 2 n cubed and to the end and so
on so eventually we get to essentially this thing
itself again repeated here and that we wouldn't
call it this we would call it two n triangle n
all right so it's a long road though from from
n triangle and to this one basically you have
to go through the entire procedure that we've
already gone through and then after this we'll
eventually get - n times and triangle n and let's
think about what that involves so that's like
n times the sequence n to the N all the way up
to the N where there's n of them here all right
that's an triangle N and when we multiply that
by n what we're doing is we're basically adding 1
to the exponent so we could write that as end to
the okay then there's all these n to the ends
and so this part of it is is having one added
okay then one can keep on going perhaps in some
way and eventually the this one then can become
an N and then we can play the kind of the same
game that we're doing at the previous level and
this can eventually become multiplying this whole
thing by n instead of just adding and then that
effect is really actually to add one to the next
little Tower okay and so there's a possibility
of eventually you know adjusting each one of these
exponents of you know increasing that that top end
there's all kinds of things that possibly could
happen here and a natural question is is there
some consistent way perhaps of getting to and
now there's questionable here okay so what has
to think about these things you know it doesn't
make sense to perhaps eventually finally get to
something like n star well this was n star 3 how
about n star 4 at is n triangle 3 n is it possible
to create some sequence of sequences of sequences
of sequences and so on so eventually we get n
trying beforehand well if we are able to do that
and if we have the nen triangle 1 and triangle 2
and triangle 3 can we sort of program it so that
we can get an arbitrary one there so if we're able
to get the arbitrary one there in other words if
we're able to extend our thinking so that we might
be able to get this then we could take the limit
of that kind of sequence and we could end up with
n star n N and now possibilities emerge that now
this label down here can start being subjected
to the same kinds of ladder considerations that
we've already been talking about maybe it might
be possible to eventually get to something like n
star and then this label down here is N squared n
or maybe even n star and to the N n and of course
all of these things here are just meant to be the
labels of the original operation so these are
already labels of our operation star ok this is
all very questionable it's all they're Emer key
to me it's like a fog out there I don't really
know how it goes and I can't say that there's
a consistent theory ER but there's probably
all kinds of exploration that can be done here
ok I think you know teams of people could work
on this for it for decades really it's just some
endless zoo or maybe it's not an endless ooh but
maybe it's some you know vast labyrinth maybe
it's a long and winding road ok but to to be
really explicit what we want is ultimately to
have control over these things in the sense of
actually having computer programs ok so it would
be fun to have computer grams that actually sort
of follow our theoretical constructions and in
that sort of way of pinning down what we're doing
so that we we're maybe not so much in fantasy
land we certainly run the risk of emerging to
some kind of fantasy journey here okay so lots of
fun I think lots of thinking perhaps for future
generations and perhaps set theorists who are
maybe tired of doing the old ordinal stuff which
is a little bit shaky and dubious might want to
come and have a go they could probably help us out
here okay so that's all very good we've gotten
um a good appreciation for the complexity the
overwhelming scale of dealing with arithmetic
at higher and higher levels what we would like
to do now is armed with this appreciation maybe
almost a sense of humility is to go back to the
fundamentals of arithmetic and now have another
look at really what basic arithmetic is actually
all about arithmetic with natural numbers given
what we know now how are we actually going to
set things up in a way that's mindful of the
differences between working with smallish numbers
medium-size numbers very huge numbers given by
mathematical expressions but perhaps not actually
supported by concrete arithmetic so there's
distinctions to be made and there's I think a
very rich landscape of even basic arithmetic with
natural numbers that we really have to grapple
with it's actually a fundamental basic building
block of mathematics of course so we do need
to think more carefully about that in the next
video we're going to start doing that so back to
very basic arithmetic I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening